docs(color): DLT-2592 theming guidelines (#845)
dialpad/dialtone: apps/dialtone-documentation/docs/design/colors/themes/index.md

---
title: Themes
description: Comprehensive theming system that enables consistent visual experiences across different contexts and user preferences within Dialpad products.
no_preview: true
---

<div class="d-m32"></div>

## Overview

> Dialtone's theming system provides a flexible foundation for creating consistent visual experiences across different contexts, user preferences, and product variations. Our theming approach leverages semantic color tokens to enable seamless switching between light, dark, and custom brand themes while maintaining accessibility and design consistency.

Reviewer: Let's be sure we define "theme" very specifically, including paired with a visual. That is, the only themeable segment is the "shell" – top and left (at least for now).

Reviewer: Let's also distinguish between `theme` and `mode`, i.e.

`mode`
* light
* dark
* high-contrast (future)

`theme`
* dp (default)
* tmo
* sunflower
* etc
* etc

Reviewer: To that end... change the second and third dropdowns here...

<img width="1518" height="344" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/473a2a34-9f09-4916-9e04-2f695a5c5360" />

...to...

<img width="1518" height="344" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ab183401-850b-4050-8c57-e71f709e304e" />

And log a Jira Work Item for DT Engineer to reflect this more specifically, i.e...

```html
<html 
  ...
  data-dt-theme="light"
  data-dt-brand="dp"
  ...
>
```
...changes to 
```html
<html 
  ...
  data-dt-theme="dp|tmo|sunflower|etc"
  data-dt-mode="light|dark|high-contrast(future)"
  ...
>
```
This would be a breaking change.

What we prioritize is **contextual adaptability**, ensuring themes can be applied systematically across components while preserving semantic meaning and visual hierarchy throughout the user experience.

<div class="d-m32"></div>

<div class="d-bgc-brand d-bar8">
 <svg-loader name="themes-overview" />
</div>

## Default Themes for Dialpad

Dialpad products ship with carefully crafted default themes that serve different use cases and user preferences. Each theme maintains our core design principles while adapting to specific contexts.

<div class="d-bgc-brand d-bar8"><svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="default-themes" /></div>

<div class="d-m32"></div>

### Light Theme

The primary theme optimized for daytime use and well-lit environments. Features high contrast ratios and clear visual hierarchy using our standard color palette.

### Dark Theme  

Designed for low-light environments and extended use sessions. Reduces eye strain while maintaining accessibility standards and visual clarity.

### High Contrast Theme

> Enhanced accessibility theme with increased contrast ratios for users with visual impairments or challenging viewing conditions.

Reviewer: Remove for now.

  color: var(--dt-color-black-900);
  border-color: var(--dt-color-black-300);
}
```

## Customize Theming

For advanced use cases, you can create custom themes by defining your own token mappings while maintaining the semantic structure.

<div class="d-bgc-brand d-bar8"><svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="custom-themes" /></div>

<div class="d-m32"></div>

### Creating Custom Themes

1. **Define your color palette**: Start with base color tokens that align with your brand
2. **Map semantic meanings**: Assign base colors to semantic roles (primary, secondary, etc.)
3. **Test accessibility**: Ensure contrast ratios meet WCAG guidelines
4. **Validate consistency**: Check that your theme works across all component states

### Custom Theme Example

```css
/* Custom brand theme */
:root[data-theme="custom-brand"] {
  --dt-theme-surface-primary: var(--dt-color-blue-50);
  --dt-theme-surface-secondary: var(--dt-color-blue-100);
  --dt-theme-foreground-primary: var(--dt-color-blue-900);
  --dt-theme-foreground-secondary: var(--dt-color-blue-700);
  --dt-theme-accent-default: var(--dt-color-gold-500);
  --dt-theme-accent-hover: var(--dt-color-gold-600);
}

> ```

Reviewer: Let's punt on doing this to a follow-up doc. We should discuss this more carefully.

<div class="d-bgc-brand d-bar8"><svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="apply-themes" /></div>

<div class="d-m32"></div>

### Theme Application Methods

#### Data Attribute Method (Recommended)

```html
<html data-theme="dark">
  <!-- All child elements inherit dark theme -->
</html>
```

#### CSS Class Method

```html
<div class="dt-theme-light">
  <!-- Scoped light theme application -->
</div>
```

### JavaScript Theme Switching

```javascript
// Switch to dark theme
document.documentElement.setAttribute('data-theme', 'dark');

// Switch to light theme  
document.documentElement.setAttribute('data-theme', 'light');

// Switch to custom theme
document.documentElement.setAttribute('data-theme', 'custom-brand');
```

### Responsive Theme Application

Themes can be applied responsively based on user preferences or system settings:

```css
/* Respect user's system preference */
@media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
  :root:not([data-theme]) {
    /* Apply dark theme tokens */
  }
}

@media (prefers-color-scheme: light) {
  :root:not([data-theme]) {
    /* Apply light theme tokens */
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer: This isn't quite right, and should be authored by a DT engineer. It might already be covered elsewhere. Ask them.

---
title: Themes

> description: Create diverse themes for projects using our simplified theming infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Theme options that allow user customization of Dialpad products.
```

no_preview: true
---

<div class="d-m32"></div>

## Overview

Dialtone's theming system is a flexible foundation for creating consistent visual experiences. It lets you adapt the user interface to different contexts, preferences, and product variations. Our approach uses semantic color tokens to easily switch between themes and modes.

> Currently, the only themeable part of the application is the shell, which consists of the top and left navigation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Theming is limited to the application's navigation regions, consisting of the top and left.
```

<div class="d-bgc-secondary d-bar8"><svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="theme-image" /></div>

### Mode

A mode defines a visual style that applies across all themes. It determines the overall luminosity and contrast of the interface. For example, light mode has a light background and dark text, while dark mode has a dark background and light text.

### Theme

> A theme represents a specific brand or product identity. It applies a unique set of colors to the shell, and it works in conjunction with a mode. For example, Dialpad default theme uses purple accents and T-mobile uses pink accents for the shell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A theme represents the core color scheme. It applies a unique set of colors to themeable regions, and it works in conjunction with a mode. For example, the default "Dialpad" theme accent may be purple, while a "Sunflower" theme's is a deep yellow.
```

Don't want to make too much mention of T-Mobile."

### Theme List

<div class="d-bb d-bc-default">
  <table class="d-table">
    <thead>
      <tr>
        <th>Theme</th>
        <th>Light Mode</th>
        <th>Dark Mode</th>
      </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Dialpad</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1C1C1C;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #252525;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F9F9F9;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #7C5CF6;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #7C5CF6;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #999999;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E6E6E6;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1F1F1F;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #D4D4D4;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #B8A6FC;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #B8A6FC;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #cccccc;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">T-Mobile</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1C1C1C;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #252525;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F9F9F9;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E20074;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E20074;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #999999;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E6E6E6;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1F1F1F;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #D4D4D4;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F8A6CB;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F8A6CB;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #cccccc;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Sunflower</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #380010;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #6A652A;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFF9E5;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #93173A;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #93173A;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #999999;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1F1C00;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FE1F76;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFF2F3;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FA8D62;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FA8D62;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #cccccc;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Ceruleo</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #003165;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #98DCFF;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E8E9E9;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FF1356;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FF1356;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #999999;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #052133;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #5FC4F9;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F5F9FD;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FF716F;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FF716F;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFFFFF;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Melon</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFE6FD;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #190826;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #511E76;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #9A006A;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #9A006A;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #321249;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #190826;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFE6FD;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFF0FE;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFB1CF;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFB1CF;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #cccccc;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Aegean</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #D3E0F4;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #10022C;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #228782;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #651E06;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #651E06;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #143A52;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #072C2A;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #8CBAEB;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #8CBAEB;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F4B59F;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F4B59F;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F9F6FF;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Verdant Haze</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #EDF0EB;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1A2214;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #344626;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #C0CAAE;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #C0CAAE;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #3F5F01;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #C0CAAE;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1A2214;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #3F5F01;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #EDF0EB;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #EDF0EB;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #cccccc;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Plum</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E4E0E8;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #0A0029;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1C1C1C;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #DE0276;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #DE0276;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #65318E;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #0A0029;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #10022C;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #65318E;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E2A4E5;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E2A4E5;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F6E6E6;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Buttercream</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F0E4CB;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #15242E;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1B2F3B;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F4CD0B;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F4CD0B;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #2B485F;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #282317;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #D2E0FF;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #ECF9F8;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F4CD0B;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F4CD0B;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFF5D3;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">Botany</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E6EBD8;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #022443;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #0D6D4C;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #6633BB;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #6633BB;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #1C1C1C;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #072C2A;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #C6E4FF;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #D3BCFF;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E6E6E6;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E6E6E6;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FEDFBF;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>
          <code class="d-code--sm">High Desert</code>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #ECE2CE;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #141F00;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #223300;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E45C10;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #E45C10;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #7A5608;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
        <td>
          <dt-stack direction="row" gap="200">
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #3F3D3C;" title="Background"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #DCD138;" title="Sidebar"></div>
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #F48662;" title="Border"></div>

>             <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FAEBA4;" title="Brand"></div>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FAEBA4;" title="Accent"></div>
```

            <div class="color-swatch" style="background-color: #FFE89C;" title="Text"></div>
          </dt-stack>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>
</div>

<div class="d-bgc-secondary d-bar8"><svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="theme-variations" /></div>

## Theming with Shell Tokens

The shell tokens are a specialized set of tokens for theming the topbar and sidebar. They are designed to be easily customized while maintaining a coherent color scheme.

### Shell Base Tokens

These are the core reference colors for the shell. They are directly linked to the base tokens and determine the overall color palette of the topbar and sidebar. These base tokens are the only ones that should be modified when creating a custom theme.

<div class="d-bgc-secondary d-bar8"><svg-loader class="d-fl1" name="base-tokens" /></div>

<div class="d-m32"></div>

### Shell Modifier Tokens

> These tokens, such as shell-action, shell-status, shell-core, and shell-accent, inherit their values from the shell base tokens. They use modifiers to create variations and specific color states (e.g., hover, active, disabled) for interactive elements within the topbar and sidebar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tokens, such as `shell-action...`, `shell-status...` `shell-mention...`, inherit their values from the shell base tokens. For example, they use modifiers to create variations or color states (e.g., `hover`, `active`, `disabled`).
```
